Risk of Exclusion in Education due to the Covid-19 Outbreak in Ecuador
================
Max Aantjes
23/08/2020

**The world is facing an unparalleled education crisis. At the time of
writing, still over a billion learners in 143 countries are affected by
school closures (UNESCO, 2020). In one of these countries, Ecuador, the
government has responded by rapidly digitalising its education system.
Despite these efforts, some columnists have publicly started to question
the fairness of this approach (Constante, 2020). My brief analysis of
household survey data collected in 2019 strengthens such worries. The
data suggests that the government’s approach will exacerbate existing
inequalities due to the unequal distribution of smart electronic
devices, internet access and digital literacy.**

The Ecuadorian government’s efforts to ensure access to education have
primarily focused on the provision of digital resources. Country-wide
school closures commenced on the 13th of March (Ministerio de Educación,
2020A). On the 16th of March, digital classes commenced in the highlands
and amazon regions, complemented by the launch of an online portal which
serves as a repository of over 840 digital learning tools and a special
website which hosts forums, videos, tutorials, homework and
questionnaires for students in upper higher education ((Ministerio de
Educación, 2020B; 2020C). Teachers were strongly encouraged to engage
with this new technology; on the 25th of March, all teachers were
invited to register for the course ‘Mi Aula En Linea’, which taught them
how to use the new digital resources (Ministerio de Educación, 2020D).

Conversely, there have been limited efforts to reach learners through
other means. From the 23rd of March onwards, the delivery of educational
content was expanded to TV and radio, with a daily one-hour educational
broadcast on 160 different TV channels and a daily three-hour broadcast
on national and local radio stations (Ministerio de Educación, 2020E).
In April, the television broadcast was replaced by the A-prender la Tele
show, a one-hour show which fused entertainment with education and
targets five to fourteen year-olds (Ministerio de Educación, 2020F).
Despite their importance, these efforts remain insufficient to replace
online classes. Particular limitations include the length of the
broadcasts, their lack of focus on particular subjects and ages, as well
as the lack of interactivity between teacher and student.

This focus on digitalisation threatens to structurally exclude certain
groups of learners due to three factors of exclusion. The first factor
of exclusion pertains to the potential unavailability of what I call
‘smart devices’, i.e. smartphones, laptops, tablets or desktops.
Digital resources and online classes (even in downloaded form) are not
accessible to learners without smart devices. Ideally, one device should
be available for each household member, since this enables all member to
simultaneously work or learn from home. Figure 1 graphs the distribution
of the number of smart devices which are available per household member
in 3,595 urban and 2,254 rural households. In the average (median) rural
household, this value equals 0.33, meaning only one out of three members
can use a device at the same time. The results in urban areas are
slightly better. There, the median value equals 0.71, meaning three out
of four members can use a smart device simultaneously.

![Availability of Smart Devices per Ecuadorian Household Member 2019
INEC data analysed by Max Aantjes](Figure_1.png)

The variation in the data further demonstrates the inequality in the
availability of smart devices within urban and rural areas. In urban
areas, the bottom 25% have a value of less than 0.5, meaning less than
one device is available per two household members. In rural areas, the
bottom 25% have a value of 0, meaning these households do not own any
smart devices. Digital education is thus likely to be inaccessible to a
substantial proportion of learners, or at least, not accessible on
demand for those learners. It is worth noting that these results are not
influenced by household members who do not need such devices, i.e. zero
to four year-olds, as they were not counted. Nor were the results
influenced by households without learners, since only households with
children and young people of school-going age (5-18 year-olds) were
considered.

The second factor of exclusion stems from a potential lack of access to
the internet in households. Internet access is a prerequisite for
downloading digital resources and following interactive online classes.
It is worth noting that students may not rely on internet access in
their homes, as there are 886 public internet centres in Ecuador which,
to the government’s credit, continued their operations during the
pandemic. According to the Ministry of Telecommunications and
Information Society, over 5 million visits to these centres were made in
2019 alone (MINTEL, 2020). Nevertheless, considering the risk of
contamination in public spaces, quarantine restrictions and a learners’
potential distance to such internet centres, it is indisputable that
access to internet at home plays an important role in the accessibility
of education.

To explore the potential risks in terms of internet access, figure 2
summarises the proportion of the school-age population which has access
to internet at home for each cultural and ethnic group. The results
indicate substantial variability between the access to internet between
ethnic and cultural groups. Only 19% of Montuvio learners and 21% of
Indigenous learners, had access to internet from their homes. In
contrast, 51% of learners in the predominant Mestizo group had access.
Care must be taken with the interpretation of these results as there is
substantial variation between the sampling sizes of the different ethnic
and cultural groups. Regardless of these limitations, these results
demonstrate the need for further research into the potential
disproportional effect of the school closures on different ethnic and
cultural groups.

![Digital Actions Performed by Ecuadorian Computer Users 2019 INEC data
analysed by Max Aantjes](Figure_2.png)

The third factor of exclusion pertains to the inability of some learners
and caretakers to utilise hardware and software. Unfortunately, this
problem of digital literacy is often conflated with a problem of
accessibility. To demonstrate this point, consider a learner who does
not know how Zoom works nor knows how to find relative instructions
online. This learner cannot follow online classes through Zoom without
further support, regardless of his or her access to the internet and a
smart device. Nevertheless, the Ecuadorian government would only
consider this learner digitally illiterate if he or she meets the
following three conditions: (i) does not have an activated cell phone;
(ii) has not used a computer in the past 12 months; and (iii) has not
used the internet in the past 12 months (INEC, 2018, p. 32). This
all-or-nothing definition neglects the reality that the effective use of
digital services requires day-to-day knowledge of the functioning of key
software programmes and internet safety.

A more holistic approach to digital illiteracy can be found in the
Digital Literacy Global Framework developed by UNESCO and partners.
Amongst other competencies, this framework stresses the importance of
literacy in terms of particular functions, including: basic hardware and
software operations; information and data literacy; communication and
collaboration; and digital content creation (Global Alliance to Monitor
Learning). Survey data on the actions which fit within these broad
categories also indicate divisions between different sub-populations in
Ecuador. Figure 3 shows the proportion of Ecuadorian computer users who
performed different software and hardware operations in the past 12
months. Only computer users who were 15 years and older and who belonged
to household with learners of school-going age were considered.

![Home Internet Connection of Ecuadorian School-Age Population per
Self-identified Ethnicity 2019 INEC data analysed by Max
Aantjes](Figure_3.png)

The figure indicates there is a convergence between the level of
literacy of urban and rural areas in terms of minimal digital content
creation, which typically requires copying and moving documents as well
as copying and pasting information. However, a potential divergence in
more advanced digital content creation is reflected in the lower
proportion of respondents in rural areas who created a digital
presentation. Furthermore, there is a more pronounced divergence in
terms of basic hardware and software operations, as the proportion of
respondents in rural areas who installed either software or hardware is
over 10 absolute percentage points lower than the corresponding
proportion in urban areas. Structural inequality in terms of the ability
to utilise digital resources thus even persists in situations where
digital resources are accessible.

It is easy to poke holes in a government response to an unprecedented
crisis, particularly if that government must make do with limited
resources. Highlighting the potential inequalities that this response
has created, however, is essential for determining the effective
allocation of additional resources throughout and after the crisis. The
growing gap between certain groups of learners in the education system
can for instance be bridged through the implementation of new
non-digital learning programmes and the hiring of additional teachers
for post-pandemic catch-up classes. Encouraging non-digital initiatives
include Save the Children’s campaign in Uganda which distributed printed
learning packs to 120,000 children (Save the Children, 2020, p.9).

In anticipation of such measures, this exploratory analysis has
suggested that structural exclusion of learners may occur through at
least three complimentary factors, i.e. the unavailability of smart
devices, the lack of internet access and the prevalence of digital
illiteracy. This structural exclusion threatens to exacerbate the
socio-economic inequalities that exist between ethnic and cultural
groups, as well as between rural and urban populations. Any attempts to
identify groups at risk should thus take these factors into account and
so should policies aimed at bridging this gap. The response to the
continuing education crisis in Ecuador and in other countries should, as
is almost always the case, take a holistic rather than an all-or-nothing
approach.

\~\~\~

*Links to the raw data are available in the corresponding [GitHub
repository](https://github.com/MaxAantjes/Exp-Analysis-Exclusion-EDU-EC-COV19).
To ensure reproducibility, all computations used to generate the
results, as well as justifications where relevant, have been made
available within the [appendix
file](https://github.com/MaxAantjes/Exp-Analysis-Exclusion-EDU-EC-COV19/blob/master/appendix.md)
of this repository. This written piece is part of a series of posts
which are meant to be conversation starters rather than bullet-proof
analyses. It hopes to inspire others to traverse beyond its inevitable
limitations.*

## References

Constante, S. (2020). *Ecuador: la educación online desde casa es
imposible e injusta*. El País. Available from:
<https://elpais.com/elpais/2020/06/12/planeta_futuro/1591955314_376413.html>

Global Alliance to Monitor Learning. *Competence Descriptors &
Glossary*. Available from:
<http://gaml.cite.hku.hk/competence-descriptors-glossary/> \[accessed 23
August 2020\].

INEC, (2018). *Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicación:Encuesta
Multipropósito - TIC 2018*. Available from:
<https://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/documentos/web-inec/Estadisticas_Sociales/TIC/2018/201812_Principales_resultados_TIC_Multiproposito.pdf>
\[accessed 23 August 2020\].

Ministerio de Educación, (2020A). *COMUNICADO OFICIAL | Suspensión de
las actividades académicas para los estudiantes para precautelar la
salud de la comunidad educativa*. Available from:
<https://educacion.gob.ec/comunicado-oficial-suspension-de-las-actividades-academicas-para-los-estudiantes-para-precautelar-la-salud-de-la-comunidad-educativa/>
\[accessed 23 August 2020\].

Ministerio de Educación, (2020B). *Plan Educativo Covid-19 para
estudiantes de 3.° de bachillerato*. Available from:
<https://educacion.gob.ec/plan-educativo-covid-19-para-estudiantes-de-3-de-bachillerato/>
\[accessed 23 August 2020\].

Ministerio de Educación, (2020C). *Plan Educativo Covid-19 se presentó
el 16 de marzo*. Available from:
<https://educacion.gob.ec/plan-educativo-covid-19-se-presento-el-16-de-marzo/>
\[accessed 23 August 2020\].

Ministerio de Educación, (2020D). *El Ministerio de Educación abre el
curso de autoaprendizaje “Mi Aula en Línea”*. Available from:
<https://educacion.gob.ec/el-ministerio-de-educacion-abre-el-curso-de-autoaprendizaje-mi-aula-en-linea/>
\[accessed 23 August 2020\].

Ministerio de Educación, (2020E). *La Educación a través de plataformas
digitales*. Available from:
<https://educacion.gob.ec/la-educacion-a-traves-de-plataformas-digitales/>
\[accessed 23 August 2020\].

Ministerio de Educación, (2020F). *Llega “A-prender la Tele” a la
pantalla de Educa Contigo* Available from:
<https://educacion.gob.ec/llega-a-aprender-la-tele-a-ala-pantalla-de-educa-contigo/>
\[accessed 23 August 2020\].

MINTEL, (2020). *Proyecto Infocentros Ecuador: Estadisticas*. Available
from: <https://infocentros.mintel.gob.ec/estadisticas-infocentros/>
\[accessed 23 August 2020\].

Save the Children, (2020). *Save our Education: Protect every child’s
right to learn in the COVID-19 response and recovery*. Available from:
<https://educacion.gob.ec/comunicado-oficial-el-ministerio-de-educacion-informa-a-la-comunidad-educativa-que-trabaja-de-manera-permanente-para-apoyar-en-el-nuevo-modelo-de-aprendizaje/>
\[accessed 23 August 2020\].

UNESCO, (2020). *Education: From disruption to recovery*. UNESCO
Institute for Statistics data. Available from:
<https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse> \[accessed 23 August
2020\].
